Welcome everyone to the
Mac OS X Server Overview session.
So we have a lot of stuff to
cover today in Mac OS X Server.
We're going to go deep into some of
the stuff that's new in Leopard Server.
And we've been working
on this for a while,
and so we're really excited
to be able to share with you,
to have you guys all here,
and to be able to talk about the
new features of Leopard Server.
Those of you who have been using
the product for a while know
that we've stayed consistent to a
strategy that we've had throughout
the development of Mac OS X Server.
We've taken an industry
standard Unix operating system,
we've picked from among the best open
source packages that are available,
and we've tied them together,
integrated them to make sure that
they all work together and tie them
together with Apple ease of use.
It's been over five years now that
we've been releasing Mac OS X Server.
And from the beginning back
into 2001 all the way up to now,
we're on our seventh release.
Actually, we have two new releases today.
The first, Tiger Server on Intel,
or Tiger Server Universal,
is a port of the existing
Tiger Server onto the Intel hardware.
So Mac OS X Server now runs
on Intel and supports the new
Mac Pro and XServe hardware.
But we're going to spend the bulk
of this presentation talking about
what's new in Leopard Server.
And for the next hour,
we're going to go into
detail about four areas.
We're going to talk about the
server foundations and improvements
we've made in the server,
as well as improvements to the
services and some new services as well.
We're going to talk about streamlined
server setup and how we've improved
the management of the server.
We have our new iCal Calendaring Server.
And we're going to talk about Teams,
which is a new wiki and a set of
web services in Leopard Server.
So to start with,
and to talk about server foundations,
I'd like to welcome to the stage,
Kazu Yanagihara.
He's our senior engineering
manager for Leopard Server.
Kazu?
Thanks, Greg.
Good afternoon.
It's nice to see you all again.
See you just once a year.
So let's start with the base OS.
For those of you who are
new to Mac OS X Server,
it's based on the solid foundation
provided by Mac Chrono and BSD.
It offers all the key features
that are expected in modern OS,
such as protected memory,
unified buffer cache,
journaled file system, link aggregation,
and on and on and on.
It's also fully Unix compliant,
so it's really easy to port software
from other Unix platforms to ours.
And we now have 64-bit.
As Simon Patient mentioned earlier,
we are now fully, fully 64-bit,
support 64-bit on both
PowerPC and Intel platforms.
Everything from the low-level
libraries all the way up to GUI.
And some of our services,
such as QuickTime Streaming
Server and MySQL,
can be ported to 64-bit so they can
take advantage of the large data set.
Also on the Leopard platform,
the 32-bit applications run natively
side-by-side with 64-bit apps.
So there's no emulation mode and
there's no performance penalty.
Let's talk about Open Directory,
which is Apple's directory
and authentication system.
The directory portion is based
on the industry standard LDAP,
and Corvus is our primary
authentication mechanism,
although we do support a
large number of legacy methods
such as APOP and Chrome MD5.
The audio really also fits really
nicely with other directories such as
Active Directory or NIS or Fluff BIOS.
Excuse me.
And lastly, we support replication.
So if you need to have the large
deployment of open directory,
you have that.
You can have up to 64
replicas right now on Tiger.
And this is what's new in Open Directory,
or some of them.
First, we have support for
cross-domain authorization in
addition to authentication.
We also have RADIUS integrated
into Open Directory now.
Thank you.
And it's based on free,
ready-to-open-source projects.
So if you have a bunch of
airport base stations to manage,
you can do so now in a centralized manner
using open directory users and groups.
And lastly,
we now have cascading replication
or the multi-tier replication.
So you will no longer have the 64 limit,
and you can have hundreds and
hundreds of replicas if you have
large deployment of open directory.
So that's a few of the
new features in Leopard.
And if you're interested in this topic,
we've got a lot more to talk about,
so there's a session dedicated to
it at 2:00 tomorrow in this room.
And actually, that's all I had for the
foundation portion since we got
a lot of new stuff to talk about.
So let's jump right into the services.
As Greg mentioned earlier,
we have lots and lots of services,
and we seem to be adding
new services every year.
And we have more than a few
to add this year as well.
And most of them are based
on open source projects,
and then many of those that we
develop are also open source,
the QuickTime streaming server,
the iCal server, Bonjour, and so on.
So now let's take a look at some of
the existing services and some of
the enhancements we made to them.
And let's start with mail.
So interesting one is
the group mailing list.
Now you can simply send email
to any open directory group,
and behind the scene,
the mail server does the
old configuration for you,
and all the members of the
group receive the email,
so you no longer have to create a
separate mailing list configuration.
Another big ticket item is
the Active-Active clustering
using XAN as a backend.
You cannot do it with NFS because
we rely on some locking semantics
that's supported by XAN,
but this should really help people deploy
much wider deployment of our mail server
as well as high availability solution.
Also got the vacation messages
as well as 64-bit mail services.
iChat Server is now based on Java 2,
which has a brand new code base.
And it's also fully XMPP compliant,
so you can now federate with
any XMPP servers out there,
including Google Talk.
And we want to make sure that
any communication that you
have between servers is secure,
even over the public internet.
So we now support certificate-based
encryption as well between servers.
And one of the most requested features
for iChart Server from the previous
release was the chart archiving,
where every single message that
passes through the server gets
saved and archived so you can
search and retrieve them later.
So this is really important to a lot of
companies out there for legal reasons,
so we have that in the product now.
And last but not least,
we do have Kerberos support for both
iChat Server and iChat Client in Leopard.
Which means if you are
binding to Active Directory,
you no longer have to pass
Createx Pass over the network.
So that's iChat Server.
Let's move on to the web front.
So now we promoted Apache 2
to the first-class citizens,
so you get to choose which
version of Apache you want to use.
And it depends on what you choose,
we automatically configure things behind.
For example, if you select Apache 2,
we automatically configure PHP 4,
or if you have Apache 2, PHP 5.
And also, you can use our admin
GUI with ease of version,
so you get to pick,
and you can basically do
anything you want with it.
We are also including Ruby on
Rails with Mongrel in this release
for your rapid development pleasure.
But we also include ModFastCGI,
so if you want to, you can use Ruby on
Rails with Apache as well.
You have the choice there.
Both JBoss and Tomcats
get the version upgrade,
and both Apache 2 and MySQL are 64-bit.
The Apache 1 is going to
stay as a 32-bit server.
And if you're interested
in this technology area,
we have a separate session on Wednesday,
and we have a couple of cool demos,
so hope you guys can make that.
QTSS.
So one of the most requested features,
mostly from the higher education,
was support for open
directory integration.
So we're working on that right now for
both authentication and access control.
We're also working on 3GP version
6 support for improved quality
of service on your streaming to
cell phones and handheld devices.
And again,
the QTSS is also going to be 64-bit.
Let's talk about X Grid 2.
There are a couple of
interesting features here.
Scoreboarding is a feature where
the individual agents can assign
scores to themselves based on the
configuration and capabilities.
For example, CPU speed,
the types of GPU it has,
or even free disk space.
And those scores get sent
back to the controller,
and then the controller assigns
jobs to the agents that are most
qualified based on the scoreboarding.
So basically,
you can have a much smarter grid,
and the end result is you
have faster job execution.
The Grid Anyway API is a new API that
helps you make your application
transparent when you use X Grid.
What API does is takes the job
and checks to see if there's a
grid available on the network,
and if there is, it distributes.
But if there's not,
it simply just loops back
and executes it locally,
which means the application
doesn't have to have two separate
code paths to use X Grid now.
And also supports directory-based
configuration now.
And we do have a separate
session on Friday if you're
interested in this topic.
Managed Desktop gets a bunch
of new features as well.
Got the nested group support,
application launch restrictions,
and we now finally have
command line tools.
So if you don't like the GUI,
you can do it from the
command line as well.
The external account is the feature where
you can take your home directory and
then move it to your portable device,
FireWire drives,
so you can carry your home
directory wherever you go.
Yep.
We are also expanding and
adding a bunch of new plugins.
So some of them include
support for parental control,
dashboard, front row, VPN,
internet sharing, and on and on.
Yep.
We are also expanding and
adding a bunch of new plugins.
So some of them include
support for parental control,
dashboard, front row, VPN,
internet sharing, and on and on.
And on the system imaging front,
we're going to have a brand new
system image utility that's much,
much easier to use.
And it's going to be also integrated with
Automator so you can create a workflow
template and use it over and over.
And again,
here you have command line tools as well.
So that's actually what I had
for the existing services.
So now let's talk about
some of the new ones,
starting with Spotlight Server.
So with Leopard,
you can search any network volumes
that's mounted real transparently
as if it's a local volume.
So all the new features of
Leopard is going to be supported,
including recent items, Quick Look,
and so on.
Access Control is enforced
and there's no configuration,
so out of the box you can
simply mount any server volumes
and you can do the search.
The DVD you have supports
spotlight searching on AFP only,
but before we ship we're
going to have support for SMB.
We also have this Apache module
that lets you do spotlight
searching from your web client,
so if you're interested you
can take a look at that.
And now let's talk
about Podcast Producer.
What is it?
It's a complete solution that lets
you create and publish podcasts.
So let's think of an example,
university environment.
What a lot of people want there is
really capture all the lecturers
out there and make them available
as a podcast to everybody,
all the students and
perhaps to the public.
And Podcast Producer lets you do
that without having any manual steps.
So let's take a look at how it works.
So going back to the lecture example,
in the lecture hall,
you probably have a camera
sitting in the back.
And when the professor
walks into the lecture room,
all he has to do is use our
new remote camera control
software to start the camera.
And you get to do that either via our
new Cocoa app or from using your browser.
And then all those machines
that's connected to camera,
we have this new video recorder software.
And what it does is it takes
the raw input from the camera,
converts it to H.264,
and then when the lecture is done,
it uploads it to the server.
And this podcast producer server,
it's sort of the brain of this
whole system that coordinates
different activities and also
does things like access control.
So in this particular case,
when the file gets
delivered to the server,
what it does is it tells
the workflow engine to start
processing that movie file.
And this workflow engine is just
simply a cluster of X Grid agents
that's sharing the same shared volume.
X, typically,
but it could be NFS as well.
[Transcript missing]
And when the whole processing is done,
what the server does is it tells the
publishing servers that the output file
is ready for delivery to the end user.
And typically for the podcast,
it's a weblog server,
but you can also deliver via
a QuickTime streaming server.
Maybe you have a high-res
version of the movie,
so you can make it available
in two different ways,
or even just post it to the web
server so you can do the web download.
In addition, optionally,
you can also send an email notification
to a set of users that you specify
with the URL inside so they know
when something new comes in.
So it's real complete end-to-end
solution that lets you capture,
process, and deliver.
And one thing to note there is the only
manual process there was the professor
walking up and then starting the camera.
Everything else is automated
and taken care of for you.
So now let's take a look
at this example again.
So with this system,
by the time the students leave the
lecture and go back to their dorm room,
the podcast is already waiting for
them in the iTunes application or
synchronized to the iPod so they
can take it after a study session,
for example.
So it's a real single-click
publishing solution.
It's also very scalable.
The example you saw had a lot of
different systems working together,
but in its simplest form,
you can run everything
on a single machine.
For example,
if you are producing one or two podcasts,
maybe that's sufficient.
But in most cases,
you have something like this or
start with something like this.
And as needed,
you can continue to expand.
For example,
you may want to put a bunch more cameras,
one for each classroom,
so you may have like 50 of them.
And then as a result,
if you get a lot more files coming
in and processing gets slow,
you can simply add CPU to the grid.
And if your disks start to get full,
no problem, just add more X Server Raid.
XSAN can support up to 2 petabytes,
I heard.
And also XSAN supports
dynamic volume expansion,
so without bringing
the whole system down,
you can continue to expand this system.
And if your end users start complaining
that podcast delivery is getting slow,
you can simply cluster all these servers.
So you can have the farmer of servers,
something like this.
Oh, guess the slide got messed up.
All right, next let's talk about the
extensibility and customizability.
So as you can see here,
it's very modular.
And there are a lot of opportunities
for you to plug into this whole system.
Example is this video recorder.
What it does is it just creates a
file and uploads the file via FTP.
So what you can do is if
you have an application,
you may want to add menu items saying
"Publish to Podcast Server" and let
people just upload the file to our system
and we're going to take care of the rest.
We can process it for you and
we can publish it for you.
Also, looking at this workflow engine,
we have this basic set of tools,
which are simply just Unix
command line tools that gets
executed by X-Grid agents.
We ship maybe 10 or so real basic tools,
so there's an opportunity for you to
come up with something real cool there.
Just throw it into the tools
directory and it's going to work.
And lastly,
the output file that this whole
processing produces is just going
to be sitting on that shared file
system at a well-known location.
So if you have any server application,
you may want to actually take the
file and do anything you want with it.
You may want to distribute
using BitTorrent,
or some of the universities may want to
integrate with their Sakai-based systems.
So a lot of opportunities here.
Podcast Producer is also real secure.
It's integrated with Open Directory and
uses it to do different access controls
using Open Directory users and groups.
So not just anybody can go up
to the camera and start the
recording and generate podcasts.
So that's sort of the four minutes
overview of what Podcast Producer is.
It's a complete end-to-end solution that
lets you do single-click publishing.
It's also very scalable from one
machine to hundreds of machines.
It's modular and extensible
and customizable,
and it's also secure.
And we don't have this
software on your DVD just yet,
but we do have a session on this
topic dedicated to it on Wednesday,
and we're going to be showing you a demo,
so if you're interested,
please attend that session.
And that's all I had for
the foundations portion.
So now I want to talk about one of
the key features of Leopard Server,
the easy management.
So one thing we've been thinking
about is our admin tools.
And one thing we've been realizing
is it's still not good enough and
easy enough for the novice users,
but at the same time,
it's not powerful enough for
the high-end advanced users.
So in Leopard,
what we have is two different
modes in which you can set
up and manage the servers.
The standard configuration is people
like small business owners or people
who need to manage their own work
groups within the institution,
or people who don't have
IT staff and just want to use
the server in a real basic way.
The dance configuration is for
IT staff and for specialized
deployments such as mail clusters.
So now let's first take a look at
the standard configuration and see
how we made it real easy to use.
Starting from the out-of-box experience,
we now have a much
streamlined server system.
So the first thing you get to
do is pick between the standard
and advanced configuration.
And if you pick that standard,
you only have a few more
additional panels after that,
and then the system also tries
to figure everything out for you.
So you don't actually have
to make a lot of decisions.
In fact, not only does it set
up the server itself,
but it also tries to set up the network.
For example,
it sets up the NAT settings on
your router so all the services
on your server work just right.
We've also added basic user management.
So if you're a small business owner,
you can just add all the
employees right here.
You can even take pictures here,
which means by the time you're done
with those few steps in Setup Assistant,
your whole server is ready to go.
The service is up and running,
the users are defined,
the network is ready,
and your group is ready
to start collaborating.
You don't have to even launch
an admin application to
manage your server after that.
If you want to,
you can customize server settings,
and we have brand new
tools for you for that.
It's called Server Preferences.
The GUI is something that looks
pretty familiar to a lot of people.
It looks just like
System Preferences here.
It's real easy to use.
And we also have a brand new
dashboard widget that lets you
monitor how the server is doing.
And again, it's real easy to use GUI,
and it's real simple.
And in general,
we also try to automate things
for you as much as possible.
So one example is that
the firewall feature.
This is a feature where
Mac OS X Server is constantly
looking for the network traffic.
And if it detects any
network intrusion attempt,
we automatically reset the
firewall settings so that that
particular IP address is blocked
for a certain period of time,
and you get notification for that.
We also have a backup of the server
based on the Time Machine technology,
and you can use it to
backup not just data,
but also server settings.
And you can restore in a granular
fashion if you want to as well.
And again, after the initial setup,
everything's automatic,
so you can kind of forget about it.
So sort of the philosophy around this
standard configuration is we want
to keep it real simple and as much
as possible automate things for you.
So now what I would like to
do is invite Jeff Michaud and
Greg Vaughan to give us a quick demo
of Server Preferences and Widget.
Thanks, Kazu.
Can we have demo on the screen?
There we go.
So I want to show a little bit
about our new administration
apps called ServerPreferences.
And what I've got here
is a Leopard server.
It's in standard configuration.
So when you install
standard configuration,
you get in your doc
ServerPreferences by default.
The more advanced administration
tools are still present.
And you can configure
them in if you want.
And the thing about ServerPreferences,
it's designed to work in conjunction with
the more advanced administration tools.
So if there's more power you need,
you can always jump into
the Workgroup Manager.
and Server Admin.
So the first thing you see here is these
are the services that are running out of
the box on the standard configuration.
We've got Calendar, iChat, File Sharing,
Mail and Website.
One service that's also running
that you don't see here is
an Open Directory Server.
And
Okay.
DNS is a good thing.
So this configuration is
good for a small business,
and you see I've created some
users here in my local directory.
I've got a user account for Greg,
and he's going to log in later.
He's got his network account information.
He's going to log in later,
and he's going to want to
auto-configure his applications.
I also notice I haven't
created an account for myself.
I want to be sure when Greg hooks up,
connects up,
and gets his accounts and his
applications auto-configured
that he sees me online.
So I'm going to go ahead and
create an account for myself.
If I can type correctly.
And I can go in here,
I could take a picture if I wanted to,
I could edit my contact information,
I can set basic access
controls on my services.
Again, if you need more control,
you can go into Worker
Manager and do more.
So that's the user panel.
I'll show you a couple of the other
services and what the settings look like.
So here's mail.
So what you've got is
just the basic stop,
start, relay, welcome message,
and spam filtering.
So I'm going to go ahead
and set a welcome message
because when Greg logs in,
I want him to feel welcome.
So there's our welcome message
is all set and ready to go.
And again, if you want more control, say,
over the spam filtering,
you can go into Server Admin and do that.
Similarly with iChat,
just the basics here, stop, start,
the server-to-server federation that
was mentioned in the last session,
and logging.
Again,
if you want more control over logging,
go ahead and use the more
advanced tools to get that.
And we've also got backup.
Backup is interesting because it
uses the time machine technology
that you heard about today to
backup the server settings and data.
So I can go into this panel and
I can choose my data store location.
I can choose whether I want to schedule
it or to back it up immediately.
And it's going to go and
actually for all the services,
it's going to backup their data,
backup any user data
that goes along with it.
So for example,
if you've misconfigured a service or
one of your users lost their email,
one of their email messages or something,
if you've got a backup,
you're all ready to go.
You can go ahead and restore it.
So I click Restore,
and I can choose one of my--
One of my backups here.
It's actually going out and
looking through the sparse
backup that Time Machine made.
And so here I can choose
selectively what I want to restore.
So that's the...
Backup and Restore functionality.
As Kazu mentioned,
we've also got a dashboard widget,
and it's for
Monitoring and Notification.
So you see again I've got my
services here that are running.
I've got this basic status
indicator and some status text here.
And I've got some a graph up
here that I can use for a CPU,
or I can view my network activity.
And it's also useful for notification.
So we're going to demo that
by using our adaptive firewall
that Kazi mentioned earlier.
And what the adaptive firewall
does is it watches traffic on
various services when it sees
something it thinks is suspicious,
it will actually block out that
IP for some amount of time.
So Greg, who's clearly not happy about
being up in the city here,
has decided to hack into my server
using AFP with a bad password.
And
And there we see we've got the
notification that something happened.
A suspicious activity.
I'll click on that and I'm notified
there's an attempted intrusion
and that's Greg's IP address.
And you can see his access
has been temporarily blocked.
So that is server preferences
and I'll give it back to Kazu.
Right, so we made the setup and
management of server much,
much easier,
but we didn't want to stop there.
We wanted to go one step further.
So looking at typical setup,
you need to set up server, the network,
but also client.
And that's the part that's
a real pain in the butt,
because if you're doing it,
you have to set up application
on each machine and every single
application on each machine.
And if you're having your end user do it,
it's very error-prone.
So we wanted to automate that.
So in Leopard,
what the client can do is it can
pull configuration information
from the server and automatically
configure all those different clients.
And not only just configures itself,
but also it can dynamically update.
So for example, if you change the host
name of the server,
all the setups on the client machine,
every single client machine
automatically gets updated as well.
So what I would like to do now is have
Greg Vaughan give us a demo of that.
Okay, so here we have a standard
install of Leopard.
So normally-- Hold on, hold on, hold on.
Demo 3?
There we go.
So normally when you first launch Mail,
it's going to come up with
its standard setup assistant.
Mail's setup assistant is fairly easy,
but there's still a few pieces of
information that the administrator
needs to communicate to the client
and tell them which fields to type
in various addresses and usernames.
And in addition to Mail,
there's also other apps
that they need to configure.
So we decided to get rid of all
the separate configuration of apps.
So now I'm going to
launch Directory Utility.
It's going to go out on the network,
and via Bonjour,
it's going to find out the server
that Jeff set up here and ask
whether I want to join that server
and start using its services.
I'll click that I do.
I now need to type in the
username and password that
Jeff set up for me on the system,
and I also need to type
in my local password.
Now it's going to ask whether
I want to go and configure all
my services to use the server.
This would be the normal choice,
but if you want to configure
your applications manually,
you're free to do so.
In addition,
we separately ask whether you
want to configure Time Machine to
backup your data to the server.
It's a separate option because if you
have your own personal laptop that
you're bringing into your company,
you may choose to use the server but
configure Time Machine yourself to
backup your own data at home rather than
backing it up to the company server.
So I'll choose to backup
all my data to the server.
So now it's going and it's configuring
all my applications to use the server.
In addition,
it's actually creating a disk
image on the server that's going
to be my Time Machine repository
for all my backed up data.
Now that it's done that,
I'm going to log out and log back
in again to use my new settings.
It's now picked up my user picture
that I previously took on the server.
And I log in.
So now when I go to mail,
instead of coming up
with the setup assistant,
it's going to be configured for
my mail application and it's
going to connect via Kerberos.
So I click on it and
there's my welcome message.
In addition,
it's configured my address book.
So if I wanted to send an email to Jeff,
I could just start typing in its name
and it'll auto-complete his address or
any address of any user on the server.
Similar,
we've done the same thing for iChat
now so that when I launch iChat,
it comes up.
I'm automatically connected to
the server again via Kerberos.
In addition,
all the people in my work group have been
automatically added as my buddies so that
I can see that Jeff's online and I could
just double-click to send him an iChat.
Then finally, we've also,
as I chose earlier,
to configure Time Machine.
So, oops,
I didn't want to launch that again.
I wanted to launch this.
So if I go into System Preferences
and go to the Time Machine Preference,
it's going to go and now it's going
to mount the volume off the server and
it's going to mount my backup image.
So I could choose Backup Now and
backup all my data to the server.
This is actually just a sample of the
things we configure on the client.
There's a few more things that
we automatically configure
to use the server services.
But basically,
we're just trying to do everything
we can to make it easy to just get
going and start using the server.
So back to you, Kazu.
Great.
All right,
so that's the standard configuration.
It's much easier to set up and much
easier to set up not only the server,
but also the clients.
Now let's talk about
advanced configuration and
server admin real briefly.
So here are some of the new features that
we're implementing in a server admin.
The first thing we did was we
redesigned the UI a little bit
with a focus on ability to navigate
among lots of different servers.
So you now have this three
column browser on the top,
the one on the left for list of servers,
one in the middle, the list of services,
and the one on the right,
specific panel for the
particular service.
And we also made a change so the
service column in the middle lists
only those services that are enabled,
although you can actually
customize if you want to.
So here's an example of
the mail overview panel.
Here's another one for the
settings panel for the mail.
And if you have only just one or two
servers and don't want to do all this
navigation in this browser and you want
to keep the GUI a little bit simpler,
you can collapse the GUI.
So you just have the bar on the
top indicating where you are and
just use that bar as the pop-up
menu to navigate between services.
So you have a choice here.
And this is something we're still
kind of playing around with it.
So we may change before we ship,
but some improvements there.
The last thing we added was the
Service Configuration Assistant for
configuring services initially.
Here's an example for the mail server.
So with this, just with, I think,
three panels,
you can create a mail cluster.
Other features include
tiered administration.
So this is a feature where different
admins have different permissions.
For example,
the admin A may be able to do everything,
while B can only reset the password,
while C can manage
AFP server and SMB server,
for example.
We also have a bunch of
different improvements in terms
of monitoring the server so you
can see how the server is doing,
performance and security and so on.
And we are also adding the event
notification functionality as well.
A lot of this is not yet in the build,
but something's going to start to
show up in subsequent releases,
so if you're interested,
please look for them.
So that's it for the easy management.
So let's summarize.
We have this brand new Express Setup
application that's fast and complete.
We have brand new server preferences
and widgets that's real simple and
we do things for you automatically.
And not only we set up and
configure servers and network,
but we also do the automatic
configuration of all the clients.
So within a minute you can
set up the whole workgroup.
And at the end,
we also have server admin which
we're going to continue to evolve
with scalability and advanced
features as a focus point.
And that's all I have to say today and
I would like to invite Michael Lopp who's
going to tell us all about iCal Server.
Good afternoon.
Let's have some fun.
How many of you are happy with
your mail server right now?
Show of hands.
Mail server.
Really?
That bad?
Oh, really?
Okay, well.
How many of you are happy with
your calendar server right now?
Okay.
No one.
That's good.
Well,
there's good news coming for you today.
All you IT types who have
been waiting for Steve to say,
we got one more thing,
and you wanted that thing to be...
and the rest of the team.
That's great.
You can kind of share those calendars,
but they don't really
talk to each other much.
They don't have any sort of common
protocol to talk to each other.
So what we wanted to do with
iCal Server is create an open
platform for calendaring.
We want to start the conversation
about calendaring again because
there hasn't been a lot of innovation
in our opinion in a long time.
So with iCal Server,
you can start using iCal or you can use
the open source application foundations,
Chandler client.
You can use Mozilla Sunbird.
You can use Safari to do
web-based calendaring.
All of these are supported
because iCal speaks CalDAV.
CalDAV is the new protocol that we're
adopting as part of iCal Server.
Thank you.
Okay,
so it's also a standards-based platform,
but it's also all the features
that you're expecting,
everything that you need for calendaring.
So, of course, free busy,
rooms and resources,
so you can invite rooms,
you can invite projectors into meetings,
proxy support, delegation, attachments,
an amazing mobility story because, again,
we're built on standards.
Directory integration,
so all your users and groups,
you can interact with
iCal Server securely,
and obviously, work group support.
That's all the features,
but there's another feature.
Your question is,
is it going to work for my business X?
And the answer is, yep.
and many more.
I hope it better.
So if you just have a single
server running calendar,
iCal Server as well as open directory,
whatever other services you have,
works great.
Your company's growing.
Congratulations, you've got more people,
your growth is going up,
add more servers.
Maybe you're going to
need a round-robin DNS.
You need more servers.
You need an open directory server.
Maybe you need XSAN.
More hardware, that's a good thing.
iCal Server is designed to scale to
all sorts of different deployments.
And we want your feedback
on that as part of the seed.
The rubber hits the road when
you actually see it working.
So I've asked Red DuTta,
who's the iCal engineering manager,
to come up here and give us a
demo of iCal Server with iCal.
Thank you, Michael.
Thank You Michael,
so what I want to show you is the latest
version of iCal that the team's been
very busy working on and one of the first
things you're going to notice is it still
looks like the same old iCal that you
know and love there's not a big leap you
have to make there to figure this out but
one of the things you'll see under the
preferences panel is this new accounts
pane now we try to make this really
simple and just to kind of show it off
I'm going to add an account for myself.
I'm going to call it
the Company Calendar.
One of the things that we tried to
do to make this simple was all you
really need to know to set this thing
up is your username and password.
Now, if you watch just for a second
with your server address,
we're going to fill that out for you.
So you don't even really need
to know your server address.
All you need to know is
your username and password,
and we'll fill it out.
And you can see iCal
as you know and love.
Now, for those of you who aren't
that familiar with iCal,
basically the way you do it is
you create different calendars.
You can categorize things that way,
colorize however you want.
And one of the things I'm going to do
is I'm going to create a new calendar,
and I'm going to call it "Important" for
meetings that are really important to me.
And I can make that any color
I want to help categorize things,
but since it is important,
I'm going to leave it at the color red.
And so one of the other things
I do want to point out is you
can VPN from home into this,
and you'll see the exact same view.
Your calendar names will be the same.
The colors will be the same.
It'll look the same as if
you're in work or at home.
So let me try and schedule a meeting.
So our senior VP Bertrand always wants
to know how things are moving along,
so why don't I try and schedule a meeting
with him to give him a quick demo.
So I'm going to go ahead and
start with the name of iCal.
And one of the things I can
do is just simply start typing
in his name as an attendee,
and it auto-completes, and I'll pick him.
Oh, and one of the things
I can see right away is,
oh, he's busy at the time that I picked.
And so what I'll do is maybe
I'll drag it to a different time.
Maybe he's available around 3:30.
And, well, once again,
he's not available.
So let me see.
Maybe he's available in the morning.
And I see that he's free.
So this was kind of great because
I knew who I wanted to invite,
but what if I didn't know?
Well, I can still see people
in the address book,
but now I can tie into open
directory and get anybody who I want
who's there in open directory.
I can pick conference rooms from the
rooms or projectors from the resources.
So, that's pretty much the
CalDAV support as we've added it.
Now, one of the other things that
you might have noticed over here
is this little notification.
So, if I click on it,
all of a sudden I can see
sitting here waiting for me is an
invitation to integrating with iCal.
It's the session, 3.30 tomorrow,
and it's from my teammate, Matt DiMaggio.
Well, I think I really want
to be there to this,
so I'm going to accept it.
In my calendar,
I'm going to categorize it to important,
and I'm going to reply
that I've accepted.
So, that's sending, receiving,
making meetings,
all this kind of stuff you'd want
to do with a corporate calendar.
So, with that,
I want to tell everyone that
there's a much more detailed demo
tomorrow at 10:30 in the morning.
And turn it back over to Michael.
Okay.
How cool is that?
I've been waiting to do
that in iCal for years.
OK, so as I said,
this is built on CalDAV.
And I want to talk a little
about the standard here.
But I first want to talk about
other standards in this space.
There's one called CAP.
It was approved about six months
ago as an RFC or something.
But it didn't see widespread adoption.
And the reason is it was really complex.
People didn't want to
reinvent a brand new protocol.
And that's why we chose CalDAV,
because it's built on existing protocols.
At the bottom there,
you're looking at HTTP.
We all know what that is.
It's very tested.
It's very firewall friendly.
On top of that, we've got WebDAV,
which is our repository and
our way to manage collections
of what's next to that,
which is the iCalendar file format,
which you know.
And on top of that is iTIP,
which is the beginning of scheduling.
And then on top of that
is the rest of scheduling,
all the server scheduling,
which is one specification,
as well as a set of
methods that actually,
as part of WebDAV,
that actually allow us to do calendaring.
So to talk a little bit more
about the consortium that
is driving the CalDAV spec,
I'd like to bring Dave Thouless
up here to talk about CalDAV.
Dave?
DAVE THOULESS: Gizzy.
Thank you for having me here.
As you said, my name is Dave Thewlis.
I'm the Executive Director of the
Calendaring and Scheduling Consortium,
which is called CalConnect by
everybody to the point where you
often don't remember it's the
Calendaring and Scheduling Consortium.
Which button we have here?
Obviously it's the wrong one.
I'm defeated by technology.
There we go.
Okay, so what I'm actually going to talk
about very briefly is CalConnect,
the consortium.
So what is it?
It's an IT consortium.
It is a partnership.
We style it as a partnership
between developers and customers.
And as you'll see,
that means we have a variety
of different types of members.
We have a relatively fancy
set of words in our mission,
but fundamentally what it boils down
to is that we are working to drive
interoperability between different
calendaring and scheduling systems.
That means interoperability to exchange,
calendaring to schedule between iCal,
iCal Server, Lotus Notes,
Microsoft Exchange,
Oracle Collaboration Network.
Oracle Collaboration Suite,
Google Calendar, and so on and so forth.
That is the dream,
and the dream is starting to come true.
What do we do?
We develop requirements and use
cases for the standards for the
protocols that are going to be
instantiated in implementations.
We help to evolve changes to those
standards to support the evolving
world of calendaring in areas like
event publication and authentication.
We conduct interoperability
testing between the two.
testing between existing calendar
implementations and for implementations
against the specifications.
And what we're trying to do is push
our industry towards interoperability
so that we don't have isolated
islands of calendaring that can't
communicate with one another.
The kinds of organizations
involved in CalConnect:
calendaring vendors, academia,
major institutions, commercial companies,
open source developers,
governmental energies,
non-government organizations,
and individual members.
Members of CalConnect,
this is not a complete list,
although it's pretty good.
You can see we have many
of the major vendors.
We have some of the
open source developers.
We have a number of major universities.
And one of the reasons I'm here
is to announce that Apple not
only has joined CalConnect,
but has been an active and very active
member of CalConnect since January.
They have been one of the primary
drivers of the CalDAV specification,
moving that forward to
becoming an internet standard.
I'll be talking a little bit
more about CalConnect next
morning and the inside Leopard.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay, so more good news.
So as of right now,
if you go to this URL,
you can download iCal Server as
Darwin Calendaring Server.
We are giving iCal Server to
the open source community
under the Apache license.
From what I hear was announced earlier,
our servers are already
getting hit right now.
So again, we want to start the
conversation about calendaring,
about innovation in calendaring.
The best way to do that is to get
it out there and get it as part of
the open source community as well.
There's a session that's going
to be this Thursday at 9 a.m.
to talk about the open source efforts.
It's going to be great.
All the details about the standards,
the different specs we're doing,
it's going to be great.
Of course, you also have iCal Server,
which ships the power as
part of Mac OS X Server.
If you've got more of an IT bent to you,
there's a session tomorrow which is
going to be talking about the nuts and
bolts of iCal Server deployments and all
the details that you need to know about.
Okay, so we saved the best for last.
this is the big one.
Teams.
You've probably heard about
it a couple sessions now,
and you have no idea what that icon is.
What exactly are we
talking about with Teams?
I'm going to give you a little
context before I tell you what it is.
The question I have for you is,
you get up on Monday morning,
you're going to work,
you get your coffee, and you're working.
You've got all these applications
on your desktop that are
begging for your attention,
and you're doing stuff.
You're doing stuff for the company.
You've got, if you're using Mac OS X,
you've got Spotlight,
the means that you go and
find things on your desktop.
You've got iCal,
which is suddenly much more
interesting with iCal Server.
That manages your day, your meetings,
the people that you
need to interact with.
You've got Mail.
As Steve was saying this morning,
he lives in Mail.
I live in Mail.
My daily routine, every day when I leave,
I write a little note to myself.
This is what I need to do.
These are the specs I need to read,
all this stuff.
I send it off.
It is the repository of a huge
amount of organizational information.
And you've got Safari,
your research tool,
your web surfing tool,
obviously gathering how you
gather a lot of information.
And you've got iChat,
which is your means of
talking to your coworkers.
How you're making decisions.
My phone hasn't rang in years at Apple.
It's usually a lawyer if someone's, like,
the phone's ringing.
Everyone else is either mailing
me or they're using iCal,
iChat.
So what's the point here?
You've got all of this information
sitting on your computer.
Everything, and I guarantee that
some of that information,
someone else in your company needs,
but they can't get to it because
it's sitting on your computer.
The game is not you.
The game is we.
You've got all of these different
people with this information.
What we need is a space to put all
this information so we can easily
share it and everyone can have access.
That's what Teams is.
So Teams is an application.
Let's go back to that icon again.
Very pretty.
It's an application as
well as a set of services.
The application is called Teams.
It's an application as
well as a set of services.
The application is called Teams.
It's a very simple application.
It's an application as
well as a set of services.
The application is
called Teams Directory.
It's got two roles.
Role number one is a directory viewer.
You need to go find someone
in your open directory.
All the people, all the locations, maps,
resources, brilliant UI,
great way to view your
directory information.
And you need that for iCal as well.
The other role is to create teams,
to create groups of people.
And you need to have a team.
You need to have a team.
And to create the set of services
that goes along with each group.
And here's the killer part.
There's no admin involved.
If you have given someone
rights to do this,
they can create a group
and they can get the wiki,
the weblog, the account,
all that stuff with
no admin intervention.
So that's Teams Directory.
Then we have the Wiki.
I'm not going to say anything about
this because you just got to see
the demo because this is the best
wiki you're ever going to see.
We've got the weblog,
which is very similar from a
technology perspective as a wiki,
but socially,
weblogs are sort of used differently.
So we'll take a look at that.
We've got group calendaring,
web-based group calendaring
on top of iCal Server,
and we've got contacts as well.
So the only way to understand
really what Teams is,
is to get a demo.
And what I'd like to do
is I'd like to bring up,
who's the engineering manager
for Teams and iCal Server-- busy
guy-- to give us a demo of Teams.
Thanks, Michael.
Hey, we got the right demo machine,
I think.
Good.
Okay, so as Michael mentioned,
Teams is more than just a wiki,
but I'm going to kind of focus on that.
But before that,
let me kind of give you the kind of
the lay of the land of the front page.
So the way Teams works is you
can basically let anybody in
your organization create a team,
or you can lock it down
to just certain people.
It's up to you.
What that means is that
you can run multiple wikis,
multiple web calendars,
all on one server.
So what happens then is that every,
once a team is created,
every team gets a website.
If you go to the top,
look at the top of this page,
you'll see a link to a wiki,
link to a web calendar,
and a link to a web blog.
So these are all things that are
included with every team that you create.
This is actually the front page,
there's content in the middle.
And let me back up just a little bit.
So this is actually just a sample
of one of the wikis that we,
we actually do use this internally.
This is a sample team for
the Leopard Server project.
So the center section is editable.
And this is generally where you would
place content that was just kind of
high level information about your team,
whatever your team was doing,
your project, anything.
And then over on the right,
you'll notice some sidebar
over here with what's hot,
shows things that have
been marked as important,
upcoming events.
This is data actually coming
out of the calendar showing
things that are coming up.
And it's coming from the CalDAV server,
CalDAV server, of course.
And what's new,
shows you pages or objects
that have changed inside the
your team's content repository.
So as I said, I want to focus on wiki.
So let me go to one of the wiki pages.
So everybody here probably
uses a wiki someplace.
You either use Wikipedia if you're
involved in any open source projects,
they all have wikis.
And more recently,
a lot of corporations that
are non-engineering driven
are using wikis as well.
Apple, for example,
has wikis all over the place.
Unfortunately, they're not these because
this didn't exist.
So what ends up happening
is that you've got,
you know, wiki server in this
engineering team group,
one in this engineering group,
and they're all different.
They're all being managed by engineers,
and it's really difficult.
The other problem is some
people might say it's better if
it's been managed by engineers,
but I would never say that
because I'm here in an IT session.
So the other problem with wiki,
another problem with wikis is that
they all use markup languages and
the markup languages are difficult.
Some people think that markup languages.
are an intelligence test.
I kind of disagree with that philosophy.
That you end up going to this mode
where you're typing in markup,
doing a preview to see
if it got messed up.
It usually did get messed up.
You go back into edit mode
in the markup language,
go to preview and you just
kind of go back and forth.
And it's just real pain.
And adding images and
attachments is a disaster.
You basically end up having to mount
an FTP server or an AFP server,
upload content,
go back up into your markup language,
type it in some bizarre
bracket or two brackets.
I'm not sure.
It depends on the wiki to link off
to that content on another server.
Okay.
So anyway,
that's my diatribe on how bad wikis are.
Let me show you how ours isn't bad.
So as I said, this is a wiki page here.
I'm going to go up here
and click the Edit button.
If you watch closely,
you'll see a toolbar pop down.
And the wiki has now gone into edit mode,
so I can start adding content.
I can select that content,
go up to the toolbar,
and make it bold and underlined.
I can do things like indent it,
outdent it.
and that sort of thing.
And when I'm done, I just click Done.
Or before I click Done,
I can add a comment saying,
What I did, and the reason we do
that is that we kick up,
like all wikis,
we keep a complete history on every
change that you make on the wiki.
So you can never screw anything up.
You can't lose anything.
It's the beautiful thing about wikis.
So click done.
It's saving this up to the server.
It's all AJAX kind of driven,
and I'm done editing.
So it's very, very simple.
I mentioned-- I want to also
show you a little bit about
how we manage links and images.
So to start off--
Let me-- I'll add a little
bit of content at the bottom.
Start off by adding a link.
If I use the right keyboard,
it might be easier.
So in this place,
we're adding-- we're keeping links
of rumors about features that people
thought were going to be in Leopard.
Learn how you-- I'm
very new with a mouse,
so.
So I'd select the text,
just go up to the toolbar
and click on the link tool.
And you'll notice a few things.
So first, we give you a list of existing
pages that are already in the wikis.
If I wanted to-- oh,
and I did accidentally--
I can just click on one of those
pages and it'll create a live link.
So let me get back to where I was.
Oops.
Select that text.
Go back up here.
Keep my hand off of the
keyboard or off the mouse.
So we're showing at the top here
pages that have matching tags.
And I'll talk a little
bit about tags later.
But basically,
it's showing me the pages that
are probably related to this.
The page I'm about,
or to the page I'm typing on right now,
also shows me recently viewed things.
We feel that when you're
building out a wiki,
the things you've viewed recently
are probably the things you
want to link together later.
I can also type in just a raw URL at
the bottom if I wanted to link to
an external site or if I happen to
know the URL for an internal page.
And the last thing I can
do is I can do new page,
and this is really important in wikis.
So one of the beautiful things about
a wiki is as you're editing content,
you can very quickly put
placeholders in for pages that
you're going to go fill out later.
And that's what this new
page setting allows me to do.
So I'm going to create the new page.
Page has been created.
I'm still editing my existing content.
I will fix my spelling error.
I click done, and I've now got a link.
So links are very, very easy.
I'm going to pop over to that link and
maybe now add some content to that page.
page.
So let me select that text.
And I've got a rumor from some
rumor site that I'd like to paste
in for everybody else to look at
and wonder who leaked the rumor.
So let me select that text.
And paste it in.
And you'll notice something
pretty interesting here.
It kept all of the formatting.
If this had come off of a real website,
it would have worked properly,
even the link.
Even the links that are there work.
So that slide got dug to death.
All my bulletin is intact
and go back into edit mode.
But I want to add a picture to this.
So let me click down here and
click on the Insert Picture icon.
All I have to do is browse
to my local picture,
click Choose, insert that picture,
and it's uploading it to the server.
It's putting it in the
repository into the right spot.
And somebody was playing with
my demo before I came up here.
Known bug.
Okay, good.
You guys remember where I was?
Okay, adding a picture, so.
Go to the picture icon,
browse to my file, select my file.
It will upload very,
very quickly to the server.
And there it is.
Click Done, and I've got a completely
edited wiki page.
It's thumbnail the image for me.
If it were a really large image,
I could show you that.
We also show history.
It's very nice.
You can go back and look at
prior versions very quickly.
Done with that.
And the last thing I wanted
to talk about is tags.
So one of the problems-- one of
the great things about wikis,
actually, is that they're all about
organically creating content,
linking that content together,
and making it possible to search
across all of that content really,
really easily.
I think that's great,
but we wanted to add a little
bit more structure to that.
So we added tagging.
We don't have any tag clouds.
I apologize to anybody
who's waiting for that.
And tabs are easy.
Just go up into the tag bar up here,
type your tag, hit Tab,
go to the next tag.
In there, if I want to remove a tag,
I can just take it and
drag it off of the tag bar.
Very, very simple.
And when I'm done, what do tags give me?
Well, I can do things like
click on the WWDC tag,
and I'll get a page of results
that shows me all of the things
that have been tagged with WWDC.
If I want to find things that have
been tagged with rumors and WWDC,
I can filter that down and
look just for those things.
So it makes it very, very simple.
Nothing's tender.
And then up here,
you see a search dialog.
That does exactly what you would expect.
It'll search across the entire wiki and
find you all content that contains the
search term that you've typed in there.
So moving back to the main page.
You may have noticed that
the tags I put in there,
one of those tags was hot.
This is actually Paris Hilton's
favorite feature.
So putting the tag hot into any
item is kind of a special tag.
And what that means is put that item
up here in the what's hot section
because that's your way of telling
people that this is very important and
you want them to look at it right away.
And like I said before,
Teams is a bunch of stuff.
The Wiki is just one piece of it,
and you should definitely check
out the session on Wednesday where
we go through everything.
Thank you, Michael.
How cool is that?
We get the web.
All right, so as Chris mentioned,
we have a session again
on Wednesday at 10:30.
And let me tell you,
you haven't seen anything yet.
We've got so much more
in Teams to show you.
And you just got to come
to the session to see it.
I want to leave you with four thoughts
really quickly about what you've
been seeing here inside of Teams.
First off, integrated services in Search.
When I go to the website,
when I go to a team site,
what I see on the Wiki is the same
thing as I see on the web log,
is the same thing I see on the calendar.
It's a shared experience.
So it's very easy for
folks to get to and fro.
Search, like Chris said,
is across all of the services.
Tags.
We've made it a first-class citizen.
We want to push down the
organization of information down
to the folks who are doing it.
We've seen it every,
it's going to be across all the services,
and we really think it's going
to give people the ability to
kind of create organic hierarchy,
organic workflow.
History.
I'm a nerd, so I love version control.
And this is version control.
It's a common feature
in every single wiki.
But what's neat about this
is wikis never forget.
Every single change
I can go see who did it.
I can see when they did it.
I can see what they did.
And probably the most interesting thing,
if you choose to actually
put comments in it,
it's the context of what they did.
I often go to Wikipedia and I look
at the recent changes on Hot Pages
because it's just as interesting as the
content because you can see why people
are changing what they're changing.
And finally, WYSIWYG.
It's pretty.
I get that it's pretty.
That's not the point.
The point is to lower the bar
in terms of accessibility.
We want everybody in the organization
to be coming in and using this content
because we know that content becomes more
valuable the more that people can get in,
use it, and edit it.
And that's why we want to make
it the simplest wiki out there.
So learn more.
Again.
There's a Wednesday session at 10:30.
And we've got a special
guest for that as well.
And we're going to have an amazing demo.
And with that,
I will bring Greg Burns back up.
Thank you.
Thanks Michael.
So, we're going to wrap it up.
So as you leave here,
I'd like you to remember four
things about Leopard Server.
The first is the server foundations.
We've made improvements to the OS and
the services in Leopard Server,
and we've added new capabilities.
We have 64-bit at all layers of the
operating system and new services like
Spotlight Server and Podcast Producer.
Easy management.
We've made the server much easier to
set up both the server and the clients,
and this is great for setting
up the server in small
businesses or in work groups.
We have the iCal Server,
open source and open
standards with CalDAF,
and Teams, wiki and web services.
So, you heard there's a lot of
sessions throughout the week
on all these new services.
We also have labs throughout the week.
There's the IT Lab on Level 1.
We have times throughout the
week when we have engineers
from the Mac OS X Server team.
And also, we have a lot of people from
the Mac OS X Server team.
And also other teams like the
Apple Remote Desktop team.
So check your schedules
and drop by the lab.
It's open from now until Thursday.
And if you want more information,
our contact at Apple is Skip Levens.
He's our server technology evangelist.
You can contact him at skip@apple.com.